And I don't remember where you were, but this is all good stuff.
The pub date of your book is March 17th, and that's the date I hope to have this.
It's a Sunday.
It works perfectly because most of the papers that take me run it on Sunday.
So I'm going to move it to run on St.
Patrick's Day.
And now you have a great St.
Patrick's Day custom.
Are you continuing to follow that?
Oh, sure.
I'm going to...
be the host of that event.
I assume this is my last one, because the hosting is traditionally done by the senator from the district.
And I'm no longer the senator.
But there is no senator, so I have a chance to... So you say, did you plan these things pretty much in advance?
I mean, or is there... Do you plan what you're going to say, or is there a lot of... Spontaneous?
Yeah.
Although the governor right now, who really enjoys this... It's amazing, isn't it?
He's getting ready now.
You're talking about Massachusetts politics.
Oh, he loves this stuff.
Yeah.
He's a big kid about it.
I mean, tell me a little bit about this appointment from the incumbent governor.
Well, it was by his board, but the governor's...
And we're talking about, for my national audience, we're talking about a Republican white Anglo-Saxon Protestant.
A Republican governor who's, you know, I refer to as Forrest Gump.
Or Mr. Magoo because everything just turns out right there.
He's one of those guys that we usually, you know, express our gratitude to because they're, you know, allowing us to use their country.
And he also, this is to his everlasting credit, when I have actually called him to say, you know, I think I cut you very hard there at the banquet last night or something, or the St.
Patrick's Day thing.
I hope it wasn't too much.
And Weld has said to me, look, don't start that stuff.
He says, if you're going to get so, you know, careful, you're going to take all the fun out of this business.
That's a pretty good attitude, isn't it?
It is a perfect attitude.
Yeah.
And so you...
Look how he became friendly with Silver, for God's sakes.
Will is a real nice guy.
I mean, I enjoy working with him.
His politics, of course, is some good disagreement.
Oh, I would think so, yeah.
But he's a great man, I think.
But, I mean, only in Massachusetts would you get this kind of a situation.
I mean, would you agree with that?
Oh, yeah.
I think we have...
Oh, he's... I mean, where his... I mean, the disappointment, I realize, it came through his board, but it certainly doesn't come without his... Yeah, he was favorably disposed.
Right.
There's no question.
And how about your decision, finally, to step down and to... Well, I just... I mean, that's 35 years.
I mean, I was in extra innings.
I enjoyed the presidency.
And...
I don't know.
It just came.
The time came.
And I could feel that this was the time.
It's nice to go out as a winner, too, isn't it?
It is.
And the manner of leaving, I guess, is important.
And the last five years, I have to tell you, was very enjoyable.
And we brought a new kind of, you know, a return of stability so that the state is up and, you know, running much better right now than it was.
only a short while ago.
Much of the state's problem was due to the downturn in the national economy, you know, the international economy.
So it wasn't the fault of everyone, but in order to have the big tightening up and the rest, why we had to work together, squabbling with the governor by the Democratic legislature would have been exactly the wrong thing.
And, uh,
Furthermore, I think people really don't understand why are these people always fighting when they should know we have a common problem and we should be seeking to solve it together.
What do you think that the common perception of the Massachusetts legislature is?
I think legislatures are always held in a low regard, unfortunately.
And, of course, the individuals are okay.
And how about the general performance?
I think the performance has been good in the past several years.
I enjoyed working with Speaker Flaherty.
on the other side, and I think it went reasonably well.
And how about your hopes for generalities now for your work with the University of Massachusetts?
I like the university very much.
It's really a great jewel on the crown of this state.
It's not as greatly appreciated here in Massachusetts as it should be.
And I think the reason lies in the fact that we have so many star-studded private universities, like, say, Michigan.
And also there is a need for the tightening up of some standards at the university, and we're addressing that now.
So, in sum, you've had a good ride.
Oh, sure.
And you've enjoyed it.
Yeah, I feel as though I was fortunate enough to be doing things that counted, you know, a little bit beyond a more selfish purpose, I think.
I hope.
You know, I always wonder about that.
It deserves a full essay about, well, aren't you satisfying, really, some desire?
But you like to think it's a little more unselfish.
And maybe if you could just think of accomplishments that are most satisfying and maybe things that are the most frustrating.
You do mention something towards the end about an amendment you wanted to...
Yeah, well, one little thing was the Procio School thing because in Massachusetts it's so restrictive that it's unfair.
But the public school unions are exceedingly powerful here and very difficult.
They feel threatened by the lowly, poorly financed Procio School.
They really should not, but they do.
That would have been something to have accomplished.
I think I'd like to have seen the Convention Center expanded sooner, because that's a particularly important thing.
And I don't see any argument against it, unfortunately.
That was one of those small points of disagreement, or small point, well, one of those few areas of disagreement between Speaker Flaherty and me.
He didn't see the need for it, apparently.
I did.
I managed to get it through the Senate, but I couldn't move it in the House.
There are things like that.
And then, of course, the accomplishments that you're particularly proud of, that you might spring to mind.
Well, I feel pleased that I was able to push through some school choice legislation.
so that people of modest means have the kind of choice within their public school system that is available to people who are more affluent.
We have some charter schools now going online.
Some are underway.
And this is very beneficial.
These are public schools, actually, but they are kind of split off and they become a little more independent.
The superintendent of the school, the principal of the school, is running it.
They're out from under some of the more difficult strictures of the schools in the system.
And I feel good about that because I think the importance of education can't be overstated.
Even a little bit of it is valuable.
And so wherever people want to come together, if they want to do so, and even if everything else is failing, those who wish to do so should be able to find some place where they can have the experience of learning.
I believe that
like yourself, that learning and education is a lifelong process.
I don't think it's something that someone else does for you.
They help you, but they don't do it for you.
I think the fundamental idea of it is to develop the, especially in those K through 12 times, develop the peculiarly human attributes, the ability to read and to write
and to think.
That's good stuff.
Let me just think if there's anything else.
Obviously, I'm going to go looking for this book here.
Well, my book.
A Gentle Madness.
It's published by Holt.
It's 638 pages, and it's all about the passion for books.
The subtitle is Bibliophiles, Bibliomains, and the Eternal Passion for Books.
And it's half history and half contemporary stuff.
You know, there's a great favorite of mine, Nick.
I am interrupting you.
Forgive me for it.
That's fine.
You're probably bursting with things to say about your own... No, that's... I'm such an ego maniac a little.
But...
Samuel Johnson.
I really like him.
Johnson was a very good man, and probably he didn't produce as much writing as he should have, but he was a very wise fellow.
And as you know, Boswell chronicled his life very, well, classically, huh?
Wonderful.
Boswell's life of Johnson.
Well, it's brilliant, yeah.
But Johnson had a
I actually went, I took the train, I went up, took the train to his birthplace in Litchfield, in England one time, and then had lunch with a fellow named John Wayne, taught at Oxford, who had done a life of Dr. Johnson.
But Johnson was really a nice guy.
I know Wayne's book, W-A-I-N.
Exactly, yeah.
I've got a great Johnson anecdote in my book.
He worked for a famous but rather dull-witted bookseller by the name of Thomas Osborne III.
And he did some translations for him and stuff.
And Osborne was giving him a hard time one day.
It's a true story.
documented and everything by Boswell and others.
And he was berating young Johnson and Johnson got so angry with him.
He was working on his folio and picked it up and threw it at the guy, knocked him on his butt, got up, stood on him, stood over him, put his foot on his chest and said, lie there, thou son of ignorance, obscurity and despair.
Wonderful lie.
That's in my book.
That's my Samuel Johnson anecdote.
It's a
Great story.
You can use Johnson for so many good quotes.
Can I tell you one I use?
Oh, please, yeah.
Don't use this.
No, no, this is this.
I told Mifflin, they had paid me half my money.
I'm working my head off.
I just thought I was the hardest working little guy in the United States.
So I needed the rest of my money.
I thought I had earned it.
Only when you deliver the manuscripts, right?
Anyway, it was slow coming.
And I said, Dr. Johnson said that only a block had rights for anything except money.
Well, that's right.
Listen, my book came out in July.
It's into its fourth printing.
Oh, great.
It's got 50,000 copies in print, picked up by Book of the Month Club, all these others.
I still haven't got a royalty check.
I'm finally getting paid next month.
I mean, we've got two kids here, you know?
Oh, yeah.
Isn't that great?
I don't even know.
You know, I'm sorry about that.
Well, it's just the way it is, and you live with it.
And they hold back 50% as a hedge against returns, and there aren't any returns of my book.
But anyway, I just sold on my next book, which will be another celebration of books.
Is that right?
Books are my passion.
That's what I do.
Isn't that great?
I was a very lucky guy.
began to read.
Well, tell me about that.
One little thing, I had a wonderful priest, Father Carl Thayer.
Carl was a bit of an eccentric.
He never left the campus at Boston College.
But he taught me Greek.
And he taught a couple of my children Greek.
And in ancient Greek, you really, I mean, what's written in ancient Greek?
Because I'm a good Greek from Lowell, you know.
Oh, yeah.
That's my background.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
When poor Michael said to me, Duke, I said, you get along so well with those ancient Greeks, what's wrong with us?
I said, where do you want to start, Michael?
I said, the ancient ones don't talk back, you modern ones.
But anyway, this is... Well, he just became Greek when he ran for president anyway, so I'm going to complain to some of us, but I'm sorry.
Well, anyway, Kyle Thayer loved the Greek, and so he got me fired up on it.
I went away between my first freshman year and sophomore year to go to the Army just to get the GI Bill.
And when I came back, he says, you're probably better off not coming back to this stuff.
He says, it's hard to get back into it.
And I said, oh, why don't I do it just one more year, Father?
I always liked it.
And so I did.
He always liked it, the fact that I did.
Well, he and I, for years and years,
We would meet at least once a month.
I'd have dinner with him at the refectory at Boston College downstairs in the priests out of St.
Mary's Hall.
And we'd chat, and I'd say hello to the other Jesuits.
And then I'd go to his room where he had two desks that are facing each other.
And I wasn't fully aware of it, but he, Carl, was always really giving me a...
guiding my self-education, if you will, post-graduate.
And if you were enjoying Dr. Johnson, I'd be interested in Dr. Johnson.
And we'd talk about it.
And then whatever the subject matter might be, whatever the books he was reading, I'd go back and read it.
And he was in the habit of re-reading
So we would read Shakespeare or whatever, Dickens, whatever he was reading.
I'd sort of be guided by that and kind of keep pace with him.
I don't think he ever watched an hour of television in his life.
Do you collect books at all?
Not very... But you more or less have a reading library and a reference library, I guess.
I do.
Obviously, you haven't been soured by politics because you have a son, and you obviously haven't tried to dissuade him from entering it.
I wouldn't dare because I always fear that whole thing about his coming back to me later, saying,
had you not dissuaded me.
So I do kind of stand aside.
He's 34, so... But what would your advice be if asked?
If not necessarily by your son, but by any young person saying to you... Well, I'd say we... Politics needs you.
If you're... But you have to put up with more than you can ever expect.
And you're...
You're also a means by that time of someone else furthering his career, if you can do your damage, whether through journalism or even through officialdom.
People who can say, aha, I, you know, have uncovered some character flaw here.
And it becomes very perilous because ambition lies all over the place.
And you don't have much defense anymore.
Nobody uses any self-restraint in how they treat you.
But you knew from the earliest age, didn't you, that you wanted to go into this?
I always liked it, yeah.
And what was there about it?
How old?
I'm sorry, once again?
Did you ask me how old?
No, no, I said, what was there about politics that so captured you, I wonder?
At such an early age.
I liked the very earliest.
I had a little flair for it from high school.
I liked to read about it.
I remember reading The Purple Shamrock, a biography of James Michael Curley.
I can remember reading You're the Boss.
And that was the name.
It was a book written by one Edward Flynn, who was in the Bronx at the time.
Behind the Ballots was a book written by James Farley.
And then even with Father Thayer, Carl Thayer loved Demosthenes.
And Demosthenes was an action person.
And Carl liked those people who were... Oh, yeah.
If you have to go, we've got plenty of stuff, by the way.
What?
If you have to go, let me know, because we've got plenty of stuff.
I just wanted to tell you, though, Carl was more than he would have realized influential, too, because he liked that.
He didn't have much patience for the philosophers.
And he loved Socrates, and we'd translate Socrates, and he thought Socrates is a man, of course, of enormously wonderful principle.
and a very good man, a gadfly there in Athens.
To say the least.
He nevertheless liked Demosthenes.
He thought that Demosthenes had been the, oh, a good politician.
It was Demosthenes who warned that Philip was in the north looking with greedy eyes toward Athens.
And it was Demosthenes who in the crown oration
had to defend himself against a villainous fellow, Escanese.
And he had a brilliant speech.
And by the way, even there, when I read that, so help me, I knew something about the nature of news.
Demosthenes begins the speech with this brilliant observation.
And this is really perhaps the greatest of all speeches, the crown orations.
He says to him, well, you have listened.
And you paid very close attention to Escanese as he has spoken of me.
And it has been fascinating for you.
Because men have always had an ear for gossip and effective.
And now it falls to me.
To do something I must do because of the circumstances.
Tell you what a good man I am.
And no one is interested in that.
Isn't that good?
Yeah.
I mean, doesn't it tell you exactly what we're talking about when we say, what sells the newspaper?
I know it.
Well, times change, but human nature stays the same, I think.
Oh, see, you're a Greek.
You know, your good friend Thucydides is a great first historian.
Thucydides said...
The one constant of all human history is human nature.
That's right.
It doesn't change, really.
Which is why Shakespeare loses none of his resonance.
Right.
That's why guys like you write about books, and you're interested in books, because you know.
It's all there.
But Carl used to be so extreme, he'd say, look, if you know the ancient Greeks, you don't have to know anyone.
Well, I would take my, if I had to go on an island, I would take my Shakespeare with me, too.
You would, of course.
Yeah, I'd have to.
I have a wonderful chapter on the Greeks at Alexandria, and, you know, how the goal was to gather all the world's knowledge under one roof, and damn it, they did.
I mean, they absolutely tried.
Of course, they had this big...
competition with Pergamum and wonderful stuff.
Well, I hope you... Sorry to talk too much, Nick.
Thanks a lot.
Listen, we've done an hour, and I've got tons of stuff, and it will start appearing next Wednesday in Worcester, next weekend, and the Patriot Ledger takes me, so it'll be in the Patriot Ledger next weekend, and all my other papers will move it, and nice reviews on the book, if you don't mind one little guy.
from UMass.
His name is Quitt, Q-U-I-T-T.
And he says, you make me so envious.
He says, I grew up in South Framingham.
He says, the only thing that I can remember with, you know, the only thing exciting that I can remember is that the marathon came through once a year.
Well, that's something.
Yeah, and then he says,
I also have a new definition for chutzpah.
That's what made it.
He says, it's you and that lockover story.
That's funny.
That's cute.
And he just enjoyed it.
He said, I couldn't put that thing down.
No, it's good.
Boy, you got some nice blurbs from Doris Goodwin and David McCullough.
These are people I really respect, you know.
And I asked them to put the saboteau in, the quote, because Larry Saboteau, you know, he... Right.
There you go.
You know why?
Because he made me wish I was, you know, born Irish.
Great, yeah.
I thought that was kind of funny.
Anyway, you're a good listener.
Well, listen, thank you very, very much, and I hope we have a chance to shake hands someday.
Remember this, Nick.
It's only because we were talking about my favorite subject, myself.
There you go.
That might be the kicker to my piece.
Okay.
We'll see you.
Thank you very much, and good luck.
Bye-bye.